9/29/26, 4:04 PM                      XOR Gate, Exclusive OR Gate | Built with Transistors


                                                                                             Menu

 Home » XOR Gate, Exclusive OR Gate




      XOR Gate, Exclusive OR Gate
                   Cody Wabiszewski
                   July 2, 2024

      The XOR gate is also called the exclusive OR gate. In this article, I will show 4
      different ways it can be built on a breadboard using individual transistors.
      This gate is similar to the OR gate but when both inputs are on the output is
      off. That is why is the exclusive OR gate as in only for the true OR cases. In
      the simplest design, only 5 transistors are needed. However in order to send
      an output 6 transistors will be needed. The XOR gate can be built with
      NAND gates but 8 transistors are needed. It can also be built with NOR
      gates and 10 transistors would be needed.

      XOR Gate 1




      The photo above shows a simple XOR gate that uses 5 transistors. In the
      layout inputs A and B are both on which is why the LED is off. The two
https://www.gsnetwork.com/xor-gate/                                                                 1/40
9/29/26, 4:04 PM                      XOR Gate, Exclusive OR Gate | Built with Transistors

      resistors on the left are the two inputs. Different color wires help to see the
      connections. If there is any ambiguity in the placement of wires the circuit
      diagram can be referenced. The gate design is a NAND gate on the left two
      transistors, a switch for the middle transistors, and an OR-like gate for the
      last two transistors. Looking at the configuration in the photo the current
      from the far right resistor can not reach the ground to the left so the LED is
      off. This is the case because all of the current from the first resistor from
      the left is going to the first ground. When this happens the switch is off
      because there is not enough voltage going into the base of the third
      transistor.

      When one input is on current is able to flow from the far right transistor to
      the second ground. Finally when both inputs are off the output is off
      because the current does flow into the base of the OR gate transistors
      making it so the current can flow from the far right resistor into the second
      ground.




      The video above shows how to build all types of logic gates. At 31:48 how to
      build the Exclusive OR gate is discussed at length. It is common to use XOR


https://www.gsnetwork.com/xor-gate/                                                          2/40
9/29/26, 4:04 PM                      XOR Gate, Exclusive OR Gate | Built with Transistors

      gates in half adders, full adders, and for other computations so this is an
      important gate to understand.

      XOR Gate Truth Table




      The XOR gate symbol and truth table are shown above. This table makes it
      clear that when both inputs are on or off the output is off. When only one
      input is on the output is on. I will show several different ways to make an
      XOR gate but the truth table will be the same for all of the cases.

      XOR 1 Circuit Diagram




https://www.gsnetwork.com/xor-gate/                                                          3/40
9/29/26, 4:04 PM                       XOR Gate, Exclusive OR Gate | Built with Transistors




      This is the circuit diagram for the first case that uses 5 transistors. Inputs A
      and B are on when the first two resistors are in place. Now the direction of
      the LED is configured so current is flowing into the circuit. This means this
      layout will work as a stand-alone logic gate or as a final logic gate. It will not
      work to send the signal elsewhere.

      XOR Gate 2




https://www.gsnetwork.com/xor-gate/                                                           4/40
9/29/26, 4:04 PM                      XOR Gate, Exclusive OR Gate | Built with Transistors




      XOR Gate 2 is very similar to the first XOR gate but adds one more
      transistor on the right-hand side of the circuit. This makes it so that the
      current can be sent as an output. I would recommend building the XOR gate
      this way as it works in all cases and only requires 6 transistors. Note that it
      takes 6 transistors and will work in all cases.

      XOR 2 Circuit Diagram




https://www.gsnetwork.com/xor-gate/                                                          5/40
9/29/26, 4:04 PM                      XOR Gate, Exclusive OR Gate | Built with Transistors




      The circuit diagram for XOR gate 2 is almost the same as the first XOR gate.
      Now there is an additional transistor that is somewhat acting as an inverter.
      However, now the LED direction is flipped and the current is flowing out of
      the circuit. This is good as the output can be sent elsewhere. Typically it is
      sent to other logic gates to complete more computations.

      XOR Gate Built with NAND Gates




https://www.gsnetwork.com/xor-gate/                                                          6/40
9/29/26, 4:04 PM                      XOR Gate, Exclusive OR Gate | Built with Transistors




      XOR gate 3 is built using 4 NAND gates. Each NAND gate requires 2
      transistors so a total of 8 transistors is needed to build the gate in this
      configuration. Input A and input B are the first two resistors on the left-
      hand side of the circuit. Right now both inputs are on and the output is off,
      which is expected. To turn the inputs off the input resistors need to be
      removed. The resistor values are 2K and the circuit is powered with a 5-volt
      battery pack.

      XOR Gate Built with NAND Gates Circuit Diagrams




https://www.gsnetwork.com/xor-gate/                                                          7/40
9/29/26, 4:04 PM                      XOR Gate, Exclusive OR Gate | Built with Transistors

      The gate-level circuit diagram is shown above. This shows how the inputs
      and output of each NAND gate need to be connected to make the NOR
      gate. At the transistor level, you get more detail including seeing the
      ground connections. Many times circuit designers are just using integrated
      circuits for the logic gates and the high-level diagram is sufficient.




      The circuit level diagram above shows component level details of this
      configuration. It is often easier to see how wires are to be connected by
      looking at the circuit diagram rather than the circuit on the breadboard. This
      shows the connections to the base, emitter, and collector of each NPN
      transistor. The transistors can be model numbers 2N2222 or 2N3904, which
      are both BJT transistors. All the resistors are 2K but values from 330 ohms
      to 2.2K would work.

      XOR Gate Built with NOR Gates




https://www.gsnetwork.com/xor-gate/                                                          8/40
9/29/26, 4:04 PM                      XOR Gate, Exclusive OR Gate | Built with Transistors




      Exclusive OR gate 4 is built using 5 NOR gates. Each NOR gate requires 2
      transistors so a total of 10 transistors is needed. For this reason, this is not
      the simplest NOR gate to implement. In most cases, it will not be used
      unless the computer or circuit architecture is based on the NOR gate. One
      example where this was the case was the Apollo Guidance Computer.
      There were two versions of the computer, the first used 4,100 NOR gates
      on separate integrated circuits, and a later version used 5,600 NOR gates.

      XOR Gate Built with NOR Gates Circuit Diagrams




https://www.gsnetwork.com/xor-gate/                                                          9/40
9/29/26, 4:04 PM                      XOR Gate, Exclusive OR Gate | Built with Transistors

      The gate level circuit diagram using NOR gates is shown above. This shows
      where inputs A and B should be connected as well as where the output of
      each gate should go. How each NOR gate is made is not detailed and each
      NOR gate could actually be made from four NAND gates. However, using
      the two transistor NAND gate is likely the best option.




      Above is the component level circuit diagram of NOR Gate 4. The circuit
      requires 10 NPN transistors, 7 2K resistors, and an LED. The circuit is
      powered with a 5 Volt power supply.




https://www.gsnetwork.com/xor-gate/                                                          10/40
9/29/26, 4:04 PM                              XOR Gate, Exclusive OR Gate | Built with Transistors




      The video above shows XOR gates used in a 4-bit computer. XOR gates are
      used in the ALU for the subtract feature and in two of the full adders.


                                Cody Wabiszewski
                         Cody started the Global Science Network with the idea people
                         should be focusing more time, energy, and resources on useful
                         projects. He has a bachelor’s degree in aerospace engineering
                         and a master’s degree in mechanical engineering. Cody has
          worked for the US federal government, a university, a large corporation, small
          businesses, and for himself. He has done human brain computer interface
          research and is currently working towards creating non-biological human
          consciousness.




      Breadboard, Components, Tools, and Power
      Supply
      Breadboards are used to build and test electrical circuits. These are used by
      hobbyists and professional electrical engineers. Using a breadboard allows
https://www.gsnetwork.com/xor-gate/                                                                  11/40
9/29/26, 4:04 PM                       XOR Gate, Exclusive OR Gate | Built with Transistors

      for electrical connections to be made without using solder which is why
      they are also called solderless breadboards. Not having to make a
      permanent connection with solder makes it so the placement of wires and
      discrete components such as resistors, LEDs, and transistors can be easily
      changed.

      A breadboard is typically used in the prototyping stage of a circuit design.
      This makes it so that mistakes can be made without having to build an
      entirely new printed circuit board (PCB). Different designs can be tested
      quickly with almost instant results. Sometimes it is easier to design circuits
      in a circuit simulator. However, at some point in the circuit design, it should
      be tested with actual components to verify it works as expected. Once a
      final design is made on a breadboard it can then be made on a PCB which
      makes the circuit smaller, and easier to mass produce.




                                      Buy from Amazon »


      There are several different size breadboards but each one is built in a similar
      way. Power is supplied to the power rails which run along the outside of the
      breadboard. The power rails are horizontal rows. On the inside, there is a

https://www.gsnetwork.com/xor-gate/                                                           12/40
9/29/26, 4:04 PM                      XOR Gate, Exclusive OR Gate | Built with Transistors

      grid of holes where the rows are labeled a-j and the columns are numbered
      1-60. The holes in the power rail rows are electrically connected but the
      rows on the inside are not electrically connected. Vertical columns are
      electrically connected between rows a-e and rows f-j.

      The power rails are labeled + and – for where the positive and negative
      terminals of the power supply should be connected. Multiple breadboards
      can be connected together by sliding the tabs of one breadboard into the
      grooves of another. A breadboard can also be secured to a flat surface as
      the bottom has a sticky layer that can be exposed by removing the paper
      backing.




      In the photo above I am working on multiple breadboard projects involving
      digital logic gates. An oscilloscope is used to measure voltages within the
      circuits. On the desk, there is a large number of cut wire scraps as each wire
      is custom cut to length. Both full-size and half-size breadboards are being
      used.

      Breadboard Components
      Wire
https://www.gsnetwork.com/xor-gate/                                                          13/40
9/29/26, 4:04 PM                      XOR Gate, Exclusive OR Gate | Built with Transistors




      There are three different types of wires used for breadboarding. These are
      jumper wires, spools for wire, and pre-cut wire. Each will be discussed in
      detail below.




      Flexible jumper wires are the quickest and easiest way to make a wire
      connection on a breadboard. These are made with multistrand wire with a

https://www.gsnetwork.com/xor-gate/                                                          14/40
9/29/26, 4:04 PM                      XOR Gate, Exclusive OR Gate | Built with Transistors

      PVC coating. Multistrand cable is flexible but does not fit well into
      breadboard holes. For this reason, there are metal pins on the end that fit
      properly into the holes of the breadboard. The disadvantage of using
      jumper wires is the extra length of wire makes it less clear where each wire
      is going to and from. This is especially true when lots of wired connections
      are made. Jumper cables are great for quick testing but are not to build
      circuits to take pictures of and show circuit designs to others.




      Precut wires can be nice because the wires are cut and bent to specific
      lengths. This does help speed up the process when breadboarding. The
      problem is that the wires are color coated based on length. Often times
      when building circuits it is nice to color code the wires based on the
      connection type. For example black going to the ground, red going to the
      positive rail, blue wires sending data, etc. I do use precut wire when the wire
      I need is shorter than the precut wire. This way I can cut it down and still use
      the color I want. It saves some time as one end is stripped and bent already.




https://www.gsnetwork.com/xor-gate/                                                          15/40
9/29/26, 4:04 PM                       XOR Gate, Exclusive OR Gate | Built with Transistors




                                      Buy from Amazon »


      The best wire to use for breadboards comes on spools. It is a 22 gauge solid
      core wire. Each spool has over 25 feet of wire. Common wire colors are red,
      black, yellow, blue, white, and green. The disadvantage of the wire spools is
      that each wire needs to be cut to length and stripped on both sides to
      expose the wire. When this is done properly it makes for a very nice-looking
      circuit where it is easy to see where the wires are going to and from. So it is
      often worth the extra time. Each wire should be cut so that it lays flat and
      the stripped ends fit securely in the holes.

      Resistors




https://www.gsnetwork.com/xor-gate/                                                           16/40
9/29/26, 4:04 PM                       XOR Gate, Exclusive OR Gate | Built with Transistors




                                      Buy from Amazon »


      Resistors are one of the most common components used when
      breadboarding. Each resistor is marked with color-coated bands to display
      its value. Common resistor values used for breadboards range from 1 ohm
      to 1 mega ohm which is 1 million ohms. Often times the exact value of the
      resistor is not needed so one with a slightly higher value should be used. For
      example, if your calculations show you need a 945-ohm resistor, using a 1K
      resistor will work in most cases.

      Resistors come with long wires on each end that need to be cut and bent to
      fit properly in the breadboard. The full length can be used but in most
      cases, this will make the resistor sit high above the breadboard. Having
      resistors lie flat makes the breadboard look more organized and is easier to
      see where connections are being made.

      LEDs




https://www.gsnetwork.com/xor-gate/                                                           17/40
9/29/26, 4:04 PM                       XOR Gate, Exclusive OR Gate | Built with Transistors




                                      Buy from Amazon »


      LEDs are often used in breadboards to show that the power is on. Using an
      oscilloscope or multimeter can provide the exact power value. However,
      often times it is advantageous to just see that power is on. Also, the
      brightness of the LED gives insight into how much current is being applied
      across the LED. When using LEDs it is important to have a current-limiting
      resistor or the LED can be damaged.

      Most LEDs have a voltage drop ranging from 1.8 volts to 3.2 volts. This is
      different from standard diodes which have a voltage drop of around .6
      volts. The common input voltage for breadboards ranges from 3 volts to 9
      volts. If the resistor is larger than 350 ohms it should limit the current to
      less than 20 milliamps. The max current rating for LEDs is typically 20-25
      milliamps. Common colors for LEDs are red, yellow, white, blue, and green.

      Transistors




https://www.gsnetwork.com/xor-gate/                                                           18/40
9/29/26, 4:04 PM                       XOR Gate, Exclusive OR Gate | Built with Transistors




                                      Buy from Amazon »


      BJT transistors have three pins that are designed to work with breadboards.
      The three pins are the emitter, base, and collector. Which pin is which will
      vary depending on if it is an NPN or PNP transistor. The most common
      transistor used with breadboards is the 2N2222 NPN transistor. This is an
      amplifying transistor and also works as a switching transistor. I have used
      these to build digital logic gates. Like LEDs, transistors should also have a
      current-limiting resistor to prevent damage.




https://www.gsnetwork.com/xor-gate/                                                           19/40
9/29/26, 4:04 PM                      XOR Gate, Exclusive OR Gate | Built with Transistors




      Transistors often come in large sets where the are many types of NPN and
      PNP transistors. The most common NPN transistors are the 2N2222 and the
      2N3904. For PNP transistors the most common are the 2N2907 which is
      equivalent to the 2N222 and the 2N3906 which is equivalent to the 2N3904.
      Each transistor does have different specifications so using the proper model
      number is important.

      Capacitors




https://www.gsnetwork.com/xor-gate/                                                          20/40
9/29/26, 4:04 PM                       XOR Gate, Exclusive OR Gate | Built with Transistors




                                      Buy from Amazon »


      The three types of capacitors used with breadboards are ceramic capacitors,
      aluminum electrolytic capacitors, and metalized polypropylene capacitors
      which are also called film capacitors. In the photo above is a set of ceramic
      capacitors. These have a capacitive range from 0.1 µF to 10 µF. Ceramic
      capacitors are non-polarized meaning the orientation of the capacitor is not
      important. Electrolytic capacitors are polarized meaning one terminal must
      be connected to the positive voltage and the other side must be connected
      to the ground side. If this is done in reverse the capacitor will quickly heat
      up and break, often resulting in a popping noise and the smell of melting
      capacitor material. Most film capacitors are not polarized. Breadboard
      capacitors can range in size from 10 pF to 10,000 µF.

      Integrated Circuits




https://www.gsnetwork.com/xor-gate/                                                           21/40
9/29/26, 4:04 PM                      XOR Gate, Exclusive OR Gate | Built with Transistors




      Breadboards are also designed to work with integrated circuits. An entire
      microprocessor can be placed on an integrated circuit so ICs drastically
      increase the potential of what can be done on a breadboard. Common
      integrated circuits to use on breadboards include logic gates, 555 timers,
      op-amps, shift registers, EPROM, FPGAs, gyroscopes, and microprocessors.

      BreadBoard Tools
      Wire Stripper




https://www.gsnetwork.com/xor-gate/                                                          22/40
9/29/26, 4:04 PM                       XOR Gate, Exclusive OR Gate | Built with Transistors




                                      Buy from Amazon »


      Wire strippers are needed to cut wires and remove the wire insulation on
      the end of the wire. Breadboard wires are 22 gauge so the stripper needs to
      have a slot to strip 22 gauge wire insulation. The wire stripper above can cut
      and strip wire from 10 gauge to 22 gauge. It also has a crimper to make
      crimp connections. When cutting breadboard wire to exact lengths some
      type of cutter and wire stripper is needed.

      Wire Cutter




https://www.gsnetwork.com/xor-gate/                                                           23/40
9/29/26, 4:04 PM                       XOR Gate, Exclusive OR Gate | Built with Transistors




                                      Buy from Amazon »


      Scissors or a wire cutter make cutting wire much easier. The wire stripper
      tool does have a cutter but only on the back of the jaws. Having a tool with
      a cutter on the front jaws makes it easier to mark where the wire needs to
      be cut. Resistor wire is very thin and is easy to cut with scissors. I often cut
      multiple resistor wires down to the proper size with just one cut on each
      side. A small wire cutter is probably best but scissors do work if that is what
      is available.

      Breadboard Power Supply
      A breadboard can be powered by a variety of power supplies. Batteries used
      to be the most common way to power a breadboard. Two 1.5-volt batteries
      in series make a 3-volt power source. Three 1.5-volt batteries in series can
      be used to supply 4.5 volts. One 9-volt battery works with connector clips
      and power wires. There are also breadboard power supply modules that can
      provide 3.3V or 5 volts. The module can receive input power through a 2.1
      mm jack plug or USB cable. The disadvantage of the breadboard module is


https://www.gsnetwork.com/xor-gate/                                                           24/40
9/29/26, 4:04 PM                       XOR Gate, Exclusive OR Gate | Built with Transistors

      that it takes up space on the breadboard. Power can also be sent from an
      Arduino, Raspberry Pi, or microcontroller to the breadboard.

      USB Battery Pack




                                      Buy from Amazon »


      In the photo above I am providing power to a 4-bit calculator that is built
      on breadboards using a 5-volt battery pack. I modified a USB power cable so
      that it could go into the positive and negative terminals of the breadboard.
      This was done by splicing solid core 22 gauge wire from the stranded cable
      that was in the original power cable. The only downside to using this battery
      pack is it does have an auto shut-off feature if the output current is too low.
      It stops supply power after about 30 seconds when this is the case. Pushing
      the button on the battery pack will allow the current to flow for another 30
      seconds. This is ok when testing circuits because you typically know within
      30 seconds if the circuit is working properly. For larger circuits, it will not
      shut off as the current used is high enough to not shut the power off.

      Cell Phone Charger and USB Cable

https://www.gsnetwork.com/xor-gate/                                                           25/40
9/29/26, 4:04 PM                      XOR Gate, Exclusive OR Gate | Built with Transistors




      Using a 5-volt cell phone charger is becoming a popular way to power a
      breadboard. Most cell phone chargers and USB ports from computers
      provide a 5-volt power source. In the photo above I modified a 6-foot USB
      cable to have breadboard jumper cable ends. Now, most USB power
      supplies will work to power the breadboard at 5 volts.

      External Circuit With USB Power Supply




https://www.gsnetwork.com/xor-gate/                                                          26/40
9/29/26, 4:04 PM                      XOR Gate, Exclusive OR Gate | Built with Transistors




      The photo above shows how to connect power to a breadboard power
      supply module using a USB cable. A 5-volt battery pack is supplying the
      power. The module receives power from the USB cable. Jumpers above
      each power rail can be moved so that 5 volts, zero volts, or 3.3 volts is
      supplied to the power rail. The top and bottom power rails can be set to
      different values. In the photo, the top power rail is set to 5 volts and the
      bottom power rail is set to zero volts. A green LED on the board indicated
      the power is being supplied to the board. There is a button that turns the
      power off to the board and the LED will shut off when power is not being
      supplied to the breadboard.

      Power Supply Module




https://www.gsnetwork.com/xor-gate/                                                          27/40
9/29/26, 4:04 PM                       XOR Gate, Exclusive OR Gate | Built with Transistors




                                      Buy from Amazon »


      The close-up view of the power supply modules shows all the features of
      the board. Input power can come from the jack plug or USB cable. Power
      going into the power jack needs to be between 6.5 and 9 volts. Power
      coming from the USB should be around 5 volts. The module is connected to
      the breadboard with 8 pins. Four pins on each side go into the power rails.
      This is an ok option to power a breadboard. I personally prefer when power
      is supplied over two wires. It makes it so there is more room on the
      breadboard and makes the breadboard less cluttered. When making
      demonstration videos it is also nice not having people wonder what is going
      on with the power supply. It is simpler to just show a red wire and a black
      wire going into the positive and negative slots in the breadboard.




https://www.gsnetwork.com/xor-gate/                                                           28/40
9/29/26, 4:04 PM                       XOR Gate, Exclusive OR Gate | Built with Transistors




                                      Buy from Amazon »


      A multimeter provides a way of measuring the current in the circuit. It is also
      a way to measure the voltage levels within the circuit. I do use this
      multimeter to determine the current. For voltage levels though, I prefer to
      see the output on the oscilloscope as this provides transient information as
      well.




https://www.gsnetwork.com/xor-gate/                                                           29/40
9/29/26, 4:04 PM                              XOR Gate, Exclusive OR Gate | Built with Transistors




                                             Buy from Amazon »


      Having a digital oscilloscope is really handy when working with circuits. It is
      often difficult to know what is going on within the circuit without looking at
      the voltage values at different locations within the circuit. The oscilloscope
      not only shows the voltage values but shows the values over time so you
      can see transient conditions within the circuit.


                                Cody Wabiszewski
                         Cody started the Global Science Network with the idea people
                         should be focusing more time, energy, and resources on useful
                         projects. He has a bachelor’s degree in aerospace engineering
                         and a master’s degree in mechanical engineering. Cody has
          worked for the US federal government, a university, a large corporation, small
          businesses, and for himself. He has done human brain computer interface
          research and is currently working towards creating non-biological human
          consciousness.




https://www.gsnetwork.com/xor-gate/                                                                  30/40
9/29/26, 4:04 PM                      XOR Gate, Exclusive OR Gate | Built with Transistors


      4-Bit Computer Built on Breadboards Using
      Individual Transistors
      To learn how computers work it is helpful to build a simple computer. This 4-
      bit computer is built on 32 breadboards and uses 962 NPN BJT transistors.
      It is powered by a 5-volt rechargeable battery pack and uses about 1 AMP of
      current. Other components used include resistors LEDs, capacitors, and 22
      gauge wires. It is awesome that a functional computer can be built using
      only these discrete electrical components.




      The photo above shows the completed computer. When operating the
      computer can add or subtract values up to 15. It can hold seven operational
      commands and store three values to load A, add, or subtract.




https://www.gsnetwork.com/xor-gate/                                                          31/40
9/29/26, 4:04 PM                      XOR Gate, Exclusive OR Gate | Built with Transistors




      The video above describes exactly how the full computer works. I would
      highly recommend watching the entire video.




      When the computer was about half finished I made the video above. The
      computer is actually functional however the registeres, databus, and ALU

https://www.gsnetwork.com/xor-gate/                                                          32/40
9/29/26, 4:04 PM                      XOR Gate, Exclusive OR Gate | Built with Transistors

      signals need to be controlled manually. This is actually a very helpful way to
      show exactly how information is being sent around the computer and
      performing mathematical operations.




      A complete logic gate-level circuit diagram of the 4-bit computer is shown
      above. Sections of the computer include the clock, program counter, ring
      counter, opcode register, opcode decoder, control matrix, data bus, 10
      bytes of 4-bit memory, accumulator register, output register, register B, and
      the arithmetic logic unit which is also called the ALU.

      Computer Clock
      The computer clock is built with an a-stable multi-vibrator. This circuit
      produces an even square wave where the output signal is either on or off. It
      is built with four transistors and two 10 microfard capacitors. In the video,
      the clock is completing a full cycle once every 1.75 seconds. The clock rate
      can be increased significantly higher than this but to see how the computer
      works this is a good clock rate.

      Program Counter

https://www.gsnetwork.com/xor-gate/                                                          33/40
9/29/26, 4:04 PM                      XOR Gate, Exclusive OR Gate | Built with Transistors

      In most computers, the program counter is a binary counter which is shown
      in the video below. For the 4-bit computer, it was easier to have the
      program counter be a 7-stage ring counter. This is because if a binary
      counter was used the memory module would have had to decode the binary
      number into individual signals. The ring counter already has the individual
      signals as the default output.




      Ring Counter
      The 7-stage ring counter was built with four edge-triggered data flip flops.
      Each trigger is built with a 330 picofarad capacitor and a 1K resistor. Each
      time the clock completes one full cycle the ring counter increments. The
      output of the ring counter goes to the control matrix and enables when
      information will be sent to different parts of the computer.

      Opcode Register
      Information is sent from the memory module into the opcode register
      where this value gets latched. Once the data is latched it is continuously
      being sent into the opcode decoder. The opcode register gets enabled from
      a control signal coming from the control matrix.
https://www.gsnetwork.com/xor-gate/                                                          34/40
9/29/26, 4:04 PM                      XOR Gate, Exclusive OR Gate | Built with Transistors

      Opcode Decoder
      A binary value is continuously being sent from the opcode register into the
      opcode decoder. Using inverters and multiple input NAND gates the
      opcode decoder turns the binary value into a single on output which
      represents load A, add, subtract, output, and halt commands. These
      commands get sent into the control matrix to control when circuits in the
      computer are enabled.

      Control Matrix
      Signals from the ring counter and opcode decoder are sent to the control
      matrix. Depending on the values of these signals will determine the output
      of the control matrix. Circuits in the control matrix are inverters or multiple
      input NAND gates.

      Data Bus
      The data bus allows signals to be connected from one circuit to another.
      Only one circuit should be sending data to the data bus at one time. By
      default, the data bus has all the data lines on. This is because pull-up
      resistors are connected from positive 5-volts to each data line. When a
      circuit connects to the data bus it actually just grounds the data lines that
      should be off. This makes it so the proper value is on the data bus. When no
      circuits are connected to the data bus all the data lines are on. There are
      four other lines of the data bus which include ground, positive 5 volts, the
      clock signal, and clear. When the clear line is connected to ground it sets the
      counters to 1 and the output register to zero.

      10 Bytes of 4-Bit Memory
      The memory module consists of the memory display with buffers and 10
      bytes of memory. When memory is being sent to the data bus the display
      will show which byte is being sent. Each byte of memory is hard coded
      based on whether resistors are connected to positive or ground. If the
      resistor is connected to the ground it is on and it if is connected to 5 volts it
      is off. This is because each byte is connected to the data bus via simplified
https://www.gsnetwork.com/xor-gate/                                                          35/40
9/29/26, 4:04 PM                      XOR Gate, Exclusive OR Gate | Built with Transistors

      tri-site buffers which invert the value. The first seven bytes of memory store
      the opcode instructions, byte 8 contains the load A value, byte 9 is the add
      value, and byte 10 holds the subtract value.

      Accumulator Register
      Data is sent to the accumulator register via the data bus. These values get
      latched in the master-slave data flip-flop and are continuously being sent
      into the ALU. During the 5 and 6 stages of the ring counter cycle, the value
      for the ALU will be sent to the data bus and latched into the accumulator
      register. This makes it so the value the ALU computes can be used in the
      next ring counter cycle.

      Output Register
      The output register is made with four regular data flip-flops. When the
      entire program is complete the final value gets latched into the output
      register. How this computer is built the output is displayed on LEDs but
      does not get sent to other circuits.

      Register B
      Data gets sent from the memory module to the data bus to get latched in
      register B. Once the value gets latched it is continuously being sent into the
      ALU. Each bit value gets latched into a regular data flip-flop. This register is
      built very similarly to register B.

      Arithmetic Logic Unit, ALU

      The ALU allows the computer to add and subtract numbers up to 15. This is
      done by using four full adders and four XOR subtract gates. Data is sent
      into the ALU from the accumulator register and register B. The output is
      displayed on LEDs and is sent to the data bus via tri-state buffers.




https://www.gsnetwork.com/xor-gate/                                                          36/40
9/29/26, 4:04 PM                      XOR Gate, Exclusive OR Gate | Built with Transistors




      Most people are familiar with the base 10 number system. Computers
      operate using the base two number system which is also called binary. The
      video above shows how computers add numbers by using a 4-bit calculator I
      built on breadboards. If you watch this you will have a good understanding
      of how the ALU of the computer works.




https://www.gsnetwork.com/xor-gate/                                                          37/40
9/29/26, 4:04 PM                              XOR Gate, Exclusive OR Gate | Built with Transistors

      This video shows how to build a 4-bit calculator using individual transistors.
      Four full adders are built to be able to add numbers up to 31 as the output
      has 5-bits.

      Final Thoughts
      Building a transistor computer on breadboards helps explain how a
      computer works. It also helps teach logic gate circuit design, data flip-flop
      design, and how to build each circuit of the computer. If I tried to build the
      processor in my current personal computer which has about 3 billion
      transistors it would take about 100 million breadboards to build. This
      computer also has 32 GB of RAM which has around 35 billion transistors, the
      8GB NVIDIA GPU has around 7 billion transistors, and the 1 TB SSD has
      around 3 trillion transistors. So clearly this could not be built on
      breadboards.

      However, when computers were first being built they were much larger
      than this breadboard computer. As technology progressed transistors and
      computers were able to be built much smaller. My next goal is to build
      artificial neurons. At first, they will be large and bulky but eventually, we
      should be able to build billions of neurons and trillions of synapses on a very
      small silicon or carbon substrate.


                                Cody Wabiszewski
                         Cody started the Global Science Network with the idea people
                         should be focusing more time, energy, and resources on useful
                         projects. He has a bachelor’s degree in aerospace engineering
                         and a master’s degree in mechanical engineering. Cody has
          worked for the US federal government, a university, a large corporation, small
          businesses, and for himself. He has done human brain computer interface
          research and is currently working towards creating non-biological human
          consciousness.




https://www.gsnetwork.com/xor-gate/                                                                  38/40
9/29/26, 4:04 PM                         XOR Gate, Exclusive OR Gate | Built with Transistors




      Leave a Comment




         Name *


         Email *


         Website


          Post Comment




      Global Science Network participants in affiliate marketing programs. These programs pay
      this website advertising fees for products purchased through links going to other
      websites including Amazon. Global Science Network does not guarantee purchases made
      and these links should be viewed as recommendations only.




      Resources

https://www.gsnetwork.com/xor-gate/                                                             39/40
9/29/26, 4:04 PM                           XOR Gate, Exclusive OR Gate | Built with Transistors

      About Us
      Privacy Policy
      Sitemap
      Contact Us



                                      © 2024 Global Science Network




https://www.gsnetwork.com/xor-gate/                                                               40/40
